David Boder: [In English] Chicago, November the 14, 1950. This is reproduction Spool 116B. The interviewee is Edith Zierer. Boder.
David Boder: We have now another young girl.
David Boder: [In German] What is your name?
Edith Zierer: Edith Zierer [?].
David Boder: Edij...?
Edith Zierer: Edith.
David Boder: Edith. And the first name?
Edith Zierer: Zierer.
David Boder: Zierer. You spell your name C...
Edith Zierer: No. Z-I-E...
David Boder: Z...Please write it down. Your first name is Edith, true? You simply are accustomed to give the first name at the end?
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: You speak German, true? Now, Edith, how old are you?
Edith Zierer: [She speaks in a very low voice] Fifteen.
David Boder: Fifteen.
David Boder: [In English] We are starting at the...we are starting at the fifteen minute of the Spool number 116 an interview with Edith Kira [incorrect], age fifteen, at Bellevue, near Paris, a home for displaced children, who are here with a group of teachers which [who have] removed them from Poland.
David Boder: [In German] And so tell me, Edith, where were you when the war started?
Edith Zierer: When the war started I went from Katowice in Silesia, no?—to Cracow, and then [I went] together with the parents to Lemberg.
David Boder: Aha. Tell me, how old were you then?
Edith Zierer: Nine years.
David Boder: You were nine years old. And of whom did your family consist? The father...
Edith Zierer: There were the father, the mother, and one sister, a younger sister.
David Boder: A younger sister.
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: How old about was your father then?
Edith Zierer: The father? Then? Forty-one years old.
David Boder: Yes. Do you know where your father is?
Edith Zierer: [Barely audible voice] No.
David Boder: No. And where your mother is?
Edith Zierer: Neither. They went away with a transport in ’42 to Dachau [?].
David Boder: Both together? Father and mother?
Edith Zierer: No. First the father.
David Boder: Aha. Now then, will you please tell me the whole story. What happened, as you remember it, when the Germans arrived in Katowice. Nu.
Edith Zierer: I was...
David Boder: When the war started.
Edith Zierer: Yes. When the war started I went with my parents to Cracow, and from Cracow to Lemberg.
David Boder: Why so fast. Now how long were you in Cracow?
Edith Zierer: Two days.
David Boder: Why did you go to Cracow?
Edith Zierer: Why? Because Katowice is near the border, near the German border. And there is...were a lot of troops [apparently Polish].
David Boder: Troops. So you simply left.
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: What was the occupation of your father?
Edith Zierer: He had a business.
David Boder: What kind of business?
Edith Zierer: Of leather. Leather.
David Boder: A leather business. Did he sell leather, or things of leather?
Edith Zierer: Things of leather. Leather and rugs. All kinds of merchandise.
David Boder: It was a big store in Katowice.
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: Now then, from Katowice you went to Cracow. And what did your parents do there? How long were you in Katowice?
Edith Zierer: A few days [?].
David Boder: Why so little?
Edith Zierer: We left the 28th of September, and then the war started.
David Boder: Oh. You left before the war.
Edith Zierer: Yes, a few days [before].
David Boder: And then, afterwards...why did you remain in Lemberg only a few days?
Edith Zierer: No. We were in Lemberg one year, a whole year.
David Boder: So where then were you a few days?
Edith Zierer: In Cracow.
David Boder: In Cracow you spent a few days.
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: And then you went to Lemberg.
David Boder: And in Lemberg you spent the whole year.
Edith Zierer: A whole year.
David Boder: Nu. And what happened there?
Edith Zierer: There was very little food. There was a [great] scarcity. We ate very badly. And when we returned to Cracow, because Lemberg was under the Russians. No [you see?]?
David Boder: Oh, Lemberg, still was...That was still when the Russians and Germans were not at war.
Edith Zierer: No. Before the war.
David Boder: Before the war, the Germans-Russian war.
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: So you went from Lemberg back to Prague [Cracow?].
David Boder: Well. Was there...
Edith Zierer: At the station...
David Boder: . . . more to eat?
Edith Zierer: There was more to eat. We had relatives there. They helped us, no?
David Boder: Yes.
Edith Zierer: And then we...in ’41 the Ghetto was established in Cracow, so we left from Wieliczka [words not clear].
David Boder: For Wieliczka. Is that the same place where Miss Kuechler was?
Edith Zierer: Yes. Yes.
David Boder: Yes. So you left for Wieliczka.
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: And...now then, what happened there?
Edith Zierer: There we remained for a year and a half. And again an expulsion, a real expulsion, and we left for Cracow, and then...
David Boder: What does it mean, an expulsion?
Edith Zierer: An expulsion, a total expulsion, a Jew-clean [procedure—an ordinance to ‘free a locality of its Jews].
David Boder: Oh. The city was to be made Jew-clean. And you left for Cracow alone or with a transport?
Edith Zierer: No. With the parents. We were fifteen [?] kilometers from Cracow, so we went on foot.
David Boder: Oh. You went with the parents on foot to Cracow.
Edith Zierer: To Cracow.
David Boder: You did not want...
Edith Zierer: To the Aryan side. Because there was already a Ghetto.
David Boder: In Cracow [there] was a Ghetto. Did you...
Edith Zierer: In Cracow [there] was a Ghetto.
David Boder: Yes.
Edith Zierer: But we went to the Aryan side.
David Boder: How were you admitted to the Aryan side?
Edith Zierer: We had not [words not clear]. We came [?] in on Aryan papers.
David Boder: Did you have Aryan papers?
Edith Zierer: The mother had Aryan papers.
David Boder: Oh. And you [?]?
Edith Zierer: We were still very small. We did not need any [?].
David Boder: And the father?
Edith Zierer: The father was hiding. He had a very Semitic appearance, so he had to hide.
David Boder: What kind of an appearance?
Edith Zierer: Very, very Semitic...
David Boder: Semitic. He was...he looked Jewish.
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: So he hid himself.
David Boder: And the mother with the children took the risk...
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: . . . to pass over...to the Aryan side.
David Boder: And what happened then?
Edith Zierer: And then we were...we were in Cracow a few days, on the Aryan side. And then somebody reported on the mama, no? A German, he did...he did...about her. He knew her.
David Boder: He denounced her...
Edith Zierer: Yes. He knew her, and he reported on her, and she was [taken] to the police, to the Gestapo.
David Boder: And where did you remain?
Edith Zierer: We...we remained in the city, with my sister, all alone.
David Boder: That means the two children?
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: You...you were nine years old, and...
Edith Zierer: I was then already ten.
David Boder: Ten years old. And the sister, how old was she?
Edith Zierer: Eight.
David Boder: And they took...they took away the mother without you?
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: How did that...how did that come about?
Edith Zierer: Because we remained home, and the mama went out on the street [?] and...
David Boder: She was taken on the street?
Edith Zierer: Yes. And she did not return.
David Boder: And your mama did not return any more?
Edith Zierer: No.
David Boder: Did you know what happened to her?
Edith Zierer: No. We knew nothing.
David Boder: Did you find out later?
Edith Zierer: Yes. After four weeks we learned that she was held in the [name not clear]. That was a prison, a German prison.
David Boder: Yes. And then?
Edith Zierer: Well, then we went to the Ghetto by ourselves, because we had no other way out.
David Boder: What does that mean? The two children?
Edith Zierer: Yes. And in the Ghetto we found the father, and together with him we went to Bieżanów [district of Cracow], because in Cracow there began a resettlement [expulsion of the Jews]. And we left.
David Boder: Now then, you say your father had hid himself.
Edith Zierer: Yes, but he returned to the Ghetto, because he could not remain there for a long.
David Boder: Where he hid himself?
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: So he returned to the Ghetto.
David Boder: And you found the father.
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: How did you find him? [Chuckle.]
Edith Zierer: [Laughter.] On the street. The Ghetto was very small, only a few streets. No?
David Boder: You did not know that your father was there?
Edith Zierer: No, I did not know.
David Boder: How was it? You went out on the street and...
Edith Zierer: No. I came to the Ghetto, and on the corner there stood the father.
David Boder: Well, what did he say?
Edith Zierer: He was very glad, but when he heard that the Mama was gone, then he already [her voice fades into silence].
David Boder: [Pause. Slowly] Yes. [Pause.] Now then...and then you were with your father in the Ghetto. And what happened then?
Edith Zierer: Then we went to a lager, to Bieżanów [district of Cracow] near Cracow.
David Boder: You were sent away?
Edith Zierer: Yes. We went by ourselves to the lager, because it was a work lager.
David Boder: Your father with the children.
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: And what work could you do?
Edith Zierer: No. I could not work. They wanted to throw me out of the lager, because they accepted in the lager only [those] from the age of fifteen and up...
David Boder: Nu.
Edith Zierer: . . . for work. And I could not work yet. So we were thrown out, I and my sister.
David Boder: What does that mean, ‘thrown out’?
Edith Zierer: We were thrown out. The Germans came in, made a check-up. So they threw out.
David Boder: They told you to leave?
Edith Zierer: Yes. They did not tell us. We were thrown out over the wires [fence].
David Boder: What does that mean? They lifted you up and threw you out?
Edith Zierer: Yes. There were such wires [fences], so they threw us out. The father did not happen to be present at the moment. He was at work, and we were alone in the lager [apparently factory grounds].
David Boder: Aha. And the sister, too?
Edith Zierer: Too. And so we went to the Pole [the words for Poland and Pole in the dative case are the same: Polen].
David Boder: To Poland?
Edith Zierer: To a Pole, to a peasant.
David Boder: You went to a peasant. And then?
Edith Zierer: Yes. And there we stayed for some time. And I...she wanted to get some pay, so the sister remained, and I went to Cracow to the Ghetto and brought from there some money, paid up for the sister...
David Boder: Yes.
Edith Zierer: And I myself remained in the Ghetto, because I...I worked here [in the Ghetto] a bit. I helped out, and I lived on it. I helped out [did some chores].
David Boder: Aha. Your Papa was still in the Ghetto?
Edith Zierer: In the lager.
David Boder: In the lager. And you had returned to the lager. [Correction] Oh, you lived in the Ghetto...
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: . . . and helped out your papa [with your earnings].
David Boder: And what became of your sister?
Edith Zierer: Of my sister. Well, she was with a peasant. And then a deportation occurred from the lager to a large concentration camp, so I with papa [?] fetched the sister. The papa himself [did it], because he wanted that we should all be together.
David Boder: Nu.
Edith Zierer: So we all together went to a concentration camp in Plaszow. That is a large lager.
David Boder: Yes.
Edith Zierer: There I stayed for five weeks. And after five weeks I, all alone, was taken to Skarzysko, to a munitions factory.
David Boder: How old were you then?
Edith Zierer: Eleven years. Going into my twelfth.
David Boder: Eleven years old. Now then, you went to...
Edith Zierer: Skarzysko.
David Boder: Pla-...
Edith Zierer: Plaszow. To Plaszow.
David Boder: You went to Plaszow.
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: Did you go together with you father...
David Boder: . . . and your sister?
Edith Zierer: Yes, yes, together.
David Boder: Was that permitted, men and children in one...
Edith Zierer: No. That was a separate lager, but they saw each other every day.
David Boder: That was a separate lager.
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: Now tell me, when you were in the lager...
David Boder: . . . were there many other children?
Edith Zierer: There were...there was a children’s home, but I did not...I did not want to be there, because I wanted to do some work so that I could help out the papa, because the papa was very weak. He felt bad [he did not feel good]. No?
David Boder: Hm.
Edith Zierer: The sister was in a children’s home, and I was not in the children’s home. I worked.
David Boder: A children’s home in the lager?
Edith Zierer: Yes, yes.
David Boder: And who managed the children’s home?
Edith Zierer: The Germans didn’t know [did not care?] anything about it, but the Jews...
David Boder: What do you mean? The Germans did not know that there existed a children’s home?
Edith Zierer: They knew, yes. They knew, but they permitted it.
David Boder: They permitted it.
Edith Zierer: At the beginning.
David Boder: Aha. And then you alone were taken. Where to?
Edith Zierer: Skarzysko-Kamienna, to an ammunition factory.
David Boder: How come? Were you...
Edith Zierer: There was a selection at night, so I was taken. I did not want to tell anything to the father and the sister. Not to take leave...
David Boder: Where were you? Not in the children’s home?
Edith Zierer: No, I was not. I worked.
David Boder: You were with the women?
Edith Zierer: And the papa worked somewhere else, and I [worked] somewhere else. No?
David Boder: Yes.
Edith Zierer: And at night...It was during a night shift.
Edith Zierer: And at night we were taken...
David Boder: Aha.
Edith Zierer: . . . to Skarzysko.
David Boder: Now tell me, how did you travel to Skarzysko?
Edith Zierer: To Skarzysko? There were a hundred people to a wagon [RR-car]. No?
David Boder: Men and women?
Edith Zierer: Hm. Only women. The women separately, the men separately.
David Boder: Yes.
Edith Zierer: And we got a slice of bread. No? We drank a little water and traveled to Skarzysko. We did not know that we traveled to Skarzysko. We thought [we were going] to Auschwitz. And...
David Boder: You did not know that you...
Edith Zierer: No. We thought that we were going to Auschwitz.
David Boder: Did you know what was going on in Auschwitz?
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: Now...
Edith Zierer: And then in Skarzysko we were disembarked, there nine hundred people, no? So they took seventy people...There were three shops.
David Boder: Yes.
Edith Zierer: A [somewhat] better shop, a bad one, and one very bad, no?
Edith Zierer: They did...where one just could die at once. So I was [taken] to the first shop...
David Boder: To the best one?
Edith Zierer: Yes, I was taken to the best, and since I knew German I got work, no?
David Boder: Yes.
Edith Zierer: They did not consider that I was a child, a box under my feet, because I was too small.
Edith Zierer: And I worked.
David Boder: What kind of work did you do?
Edith Zierer: At munitions.
David Boder: Yes.
Edith Zierer: Shells.
David Boder: Yes. And how did they behave themselves? How did they behave themselves towards you?
Edith Zierer: Towards me they behaved very well, no?
David Boder: Yes.
Edith Zierer: Because I was small, but still it depended on his moods. He was [?] a good man. At the beginning he behaved himself well, and then it became worse from day to day.
David Boder: What was it about? What did he do?
Edith Zierer: Not he. He left and other foreman came in his place. And then it was already very bad.
David Boder: Why [?]?
Edith Zierer: I went hungry. I worked a lot. It was an enormous...a three times increase...
David Boder: What?
Edith Zierer: Three times as much of the same work had to be done.
David Boder: Aha.
Edith Zierer: And so they beat us...
David Boder: Who beat you?
Edith Zierer: The Germans.
David Boder: Yes. Who?
Edith Zierer: The foremen.
David Boder: The foremen themselves, or were there capos?
Edith Zierer: No, there were no capos.
David Boder: The masters themselves beat you?
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: Now...[go on].
Edith Zierer: If one made a smelt, no? [See below.]
David Boder: Yes.
Edith Zierer: One would get twenty with a rubber cudgel. [Her voice practically fades for the next section dealing with the beatings.]
David Boder: What does it mean, ‘when one made a smelt’?
Edith Zierer: Smelt, that means a bad shell, no? [Rejected shell to be remelted.]
David Boder: Yes.
Edith Zierer: When they...there was an inspection [control].
Edith Zierer: A continuous German control. If somebody made it wrong, a smelt—that was called a smelt—then he would get a beating.
David Boder: With a rubber cudgel.
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: Nu.
Edith Zierer: And then in ’43 we went away to the third lager...[corrects herself] the fourth lager already, to Czestochowa. And in Czestochowa we were for a year and a half, and there the Russians...
David Boder: You were for a year and a half in Czestochowa.
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: And there the Russians liberated you.
David Boder: And there you were all alone?
Edith Zierer: All alone.
David Boder: Didn’t you since then, while you were in the other factory...
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: Didn’t you hear anything from the father, your sister?
Edith Zierer: No, no, nothing.
David Boder: And you don’t know where your sister is now?
Edith Zierer: No, nothing. She probably went to Auschwitz, and there the children, too, were [voice fades] done away with.
David Boder: In Auschwitz [in subdued tone like an echo] the children were done away with? [In normal voice] Now then the Russian had liberated you. And what happened then?
Edith Zierer: Then I returned to Katowice, because I thought that the parents were there. So I...
David Boder: What does it mean, ‘you returned’? How did you return to...
Edith Zierer: The Russians were not any more in Chenstokhov, so I returned [retreated?] together with the Russians.
David Boder: What does that mean, ‘with the Russians’?
Edith Zierer: Together with the army.
David Boder: By train or how?
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: By train? Did they admit you?
David Boder: And you returned. Where to?
Edith Zierer: To Katowice.
David Boder: Yes, and...
Edith Zierer: In Katowice I did not find anybody, no? The parents were there no more. The house was lead-sealed [plumbed], and I could not get in at all. And I spent a few weeks with the Committee [in a shelter], and then I went to Cracow, and they took me with them [her voice fades]...
David Boder: What?
Edith Zierer: They were with [?] me.
David Boder: Aha?
Edith Zierer: They helped me.
David Boder: Why was the house lead-sealed? Was this your own house [your property]?
Edith Zierer: Yes, that was our own house. When the Germans left they plumbed it.
David Boder: Oh. Couldn’t you tear off the plumb?
Edith Zierer: No, that was [prohibited]...that was not permitted.
David Boder: But the Russians were already there.
Edith Zierer: Yes, but the Russians did not permit it, because I was not yet eighteen years old.
David Boder: You were not yet eighteen, and...?
Edith Zierer: That is what I was told, no? When I shall be eighteen years old I will get the apartment back. Because nobody else from the family had remained, and I was [allegedly] too young to have my own apartment.
David Boder: Aha. And no one else lived there?
Edith Zierer: There were Russians afterwards [?], an officer [?].
David Boder: Aha. And he entered the apartment.
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: Did you see? Were your things there?
Edith Zierer: No.
David Boder: Aha. Talk in this direction [towards the microphone].
Edith Zierer: No, nothing was there any more.
David Boder: And to what kind of a woman did you go? A Jewess or a...? [She must have mentioned this woman aside from the microphone.]
Edith Zierer: A Jewess.
David Boder: And...
Edith Zierer: She took me in, and I had it very good with her.
David Boder: Yes. And then? You were five [?] weeks there?
Edith Zierer: And then I was sent to Zakopane.
David Boder: Who?
Edith Zierer: The Committee.
David Boder: Which Committee was that?
Edith Zierer: The Committee of Katowice, a Jewish Committee.
David Boder: Yes. And how far is Zakopane from Katowice?
Edith Zierer: From Katowice? One hundred and fifty kilometers.
David Boder: Aha.
Edith Zierer: That is a children’s home, no? That is [words not clear].
David Boder: Yes. They sent you to a children’s home where...
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: . . . Mrs. Kuechler was?
David Boder: And...what happened then?
Edith Zierer: I had it very good there. I studied, and then we left for France.
David Boder: Why did you leave for France? What happened there?
Edith Zierer: The Poles. The Poles were beating up, no?
David Boder: Whom.
Edith Zierer: The Jews. We were...we were going to school, to the gymnasium [secondary school], and they beat us up, and...
David Boder: Who beat you? The children at school, yes?
Edith Zierer: Yes, the children at school.
David Boder: Why?
Edith Zierer: [They were] anti-Semitic. Well...
David Boder: Well, yes. But the war...the Poles were liberated. They were...
Edith Zierer: Well, but they did not want...In Zakopane there were very many Jews, and they did not want any Jews. They could not look at the Jews. And they...the Jews were beaten up. A better seat in the [classroom]...
David Boder: And what did the teachers say? The Police?
Edith Zierer: The teachers—nothing. The director intervened some. Yes, yes.
David Boder: What?
Edith Zierer: The director hollered...hollered at them.
David Boder: He scolded them a bit.
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: But they paid no heed.
Edith Zierer: No, not at all.
David Boder: Nu, and then what was going on in Zakopane? What happened then?
Edith Zierer: So we left. The...the...Mrs. Kuechler has...that is, we departed with her.
David Boder: And where did you go?
Edith Zierer: First to Prague. And from Prague—we were a week in Prague—and then to France.
David Boder: How did you go to France, by...
Edith Zierer: By bus.
David Boder: By bus. [Chuckle.] All sixty children in one...
Edith Zierer: Two busses.
David Boder: Two busses. Who provided these busses?
Edith Zierer: That was an organization who provided...
David Boder: You don’t know what kind of organization? Now, what are you now doing here?
Edith Zierer: Here? We study...
David Boder: What are you studying?
Edith Zierer: I attend the second year of Gymnasium.
David Boder: You are going to school here.
Edith Zierer: No. We have it at home. We have a professor and a woman teacher.
David Boder: Yes.
Edith Zierer: And we study Hebrew, French...
David Boder: Nu.
Edith Zierer: And we studied English, but now we can’t study three languages at once.
David Boder: Yes, and one shouldn’t.
Edith Zierer: So we study two languages, geography, history, and...
David Boder: . . . et cetera.
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: Do you work? Do you help with the chores?
Edith Zierer: Yes, every child helps here. Every week...every week a different child has duty in the kitchen, no? She works. Or a duty [?] in the house, in the garden.
David Boder: And who attends [takes care of] the little children?
Edith Zierer: There are such two women, no?
David Boder: Two women take care of the small children.
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: Do you have to help out with it?
Edith Zierer: No, not now any more.
David Boder: Nu, and what do you think will become of you?
Edith Zierer: I don’t know.
David Boder: Oh. [Pause.] What do you want to learn? What would you like to study? What do you like to learn?
Edith Zierer: I want to study? [Pause.]
David Boder: Yes.
Edith Zierer: I don’t know [?].
David Boder: How much schooling did you have?
Edith Zierer: Schooling? I have studied...four grades, completed, no? And when the war was over I went to Zakopane, to the first grade of the Gymnaisum [apparently high school level]. And then...
David Boder: Now, do you want to learn some trade?
Edith Zierer: A trade. Maybe [?] no. I enjoy very much to study languages, no?
David Boder: What languages?
Edith Zierer: Makes no difference.
David Boder: Hm. And where do you all intend to go?
Edith Zierer: To Palestine, for sure.
David Boder: You are for sure to go to Palestine?
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: Well. There you will mostly work on the land?
Edith Zierer: Well, maybe.
David Boder: Do you like it here?
Edith Zierer: Yes, very much.
David Boder: Well. Could you tell me, if I ask you about all this time, which was the hardest moment in your life?
Edith Zierer: The hardest moment was when they took away the mama. I remained all alone with the sister. Without a penny, we had no money, no? And we did not know where the father was. We remained all alone on the Aryan side. And then when I left, without the parents, without the father and the sister, for Skarzysko.
David Boder: Now...When you worked in the munitions factory, where did you sleep?
Edith Zierer: There were long barracks. I did [words not clear]. The beds [?] were mounted. Hundred fifty people were in a long barracks.
David Boder: Women alone?
Edith Zierer: Yes, separate. The women were separate, the men separate.
David Boder: Was your hair...hair shorn?
Edith Zierer: Well, only from the head.
David Boder: Otherwise not.
Edith Zierer: No.
David Boder: Were you able to keep clean there?
Edith Zierer: Yes.
David Boder: Did they give soap?
Edith Zierer: Very little. But we were...because in a munitions factory there is a lot of soap, we had...and soda. So we washed ourselves with that soda. It was smarting badly, but...
David Boder: Yes. So you washed yourselves with the soda. What was there soap for in the munitions factory?
Edith Zierer: So, to wash the shells [?]. The shells [?] were washed.
David Boder: Oh. So you took some soap with you, or what?
Edith Zierer: It was not permitted to take [it]. One got beaten for it, but sometimes one would get it from the foreman, when he was in a good mood [?].
David Boder: [In English] This concludes the interview with Edith Zierer, a fifteen year old girl who is now in the home for displaced children at Bellevue near Paris. An Illinois Institute of Technology wire recording.